the one way to know your strengths
is to ask yourself what do you do
that you feel the most confidence doing
have you ever looked at how much content
you've put out no it's a lot dude like
when you search your name like to go
because i normally try to watch like
basically everything and i was like i
give up
it's just it's really incredible um
and going through that stuff it seems
really clear to me that you have massive
self-awareness
and
what would you say like is a is there a
process for people to gain more
self-awareness and then what are from a
behavioral um
uh you know just human behavior level
what are things that trip up the average
person the first answer i mean i'm a
huge fan of the book thinking fast and
slow i don't know how if you've read it
yeah it's a great book because for me
it's got a really close pattern
connection again to what i studied
so just understanding system one and
system two if anyone watching hasn't
read it i highly recommend it just being
able to differentiate between system one
and system two as daniel kahneman calls
it in the vedic philosophy we call
differentiating between the mind and the
intelligence
knowing how to differentiate the voices
in your head is the first level of
self-awareness so break down what system
one and system two are absolutely so
system one is your initial response to
anything that happens it's a stop that i
can't really say so if you say something
i don't like
my system one naturally would be a face
that i pull that i don't agree with that
that's that's an understanding of what
system one is it's your initial
default reaction in the moment that can
be positive often for example if someone
pulls out a knife you feel scared and
you run that system one that's a good
thing it's it's safe for you but also
system one is someone says something
that hurts your ego and you start
defending yourself immediately that's
also that's a negative of system one
that we would refer to as the mind it's
built up of conditioning those responses
are conditioned those default elements
are all there because of habit and
continuous practice
the system two is more like the
intelligence what i would say is more
like the parent if you can consider
system one to be more like a child
system two is more like a parent it
looks more at the long term it looks
more at the bigger picture it processes
that default reaction through a set of
checking and metrics to decide whether
that's true the child is the the one
that wants everything right away
impatient quickly responding straight
away reacting when it doesn't get what
he wants the intelligent parent and good
one knows what the child wants and needs
and what's better for in the long term
just starting there
and being able to reflect and observe
the different voices inside of us is a
great place to start yourself awareness
because the biggest challenge is that
most of us don't know what we're
listening to and we don't most of us
don't even know that there are more than
one voice inside of us
just getting over that line is a huge
win
because now at least you're trying to
differentiate
in what you're hearing and that's going
to help you make better decisions in the
future so that was answer one does that
answer your question oh yes and second
one was what um
so that's awareness how can what are
like typical things that trip people up
that so
in your answer just now it's like okay
if you want to become more aware just
know that those two things are happening
right you're gonna have an initial
response and then one that's more
calculated now be aware of these two or
three things that are also coming for
you
the biggest challenge is that there's
just so much noise
it's like have you ever had someone in
your home maybe it's your wife or maybe
it's a friend or whatever just play a
really bad song too often right just
playing a song that you really don't
actually heard my wife laugh because she
knows how guilty she right okay there
you go right there you go and you just
play a song and just think oh turn that
off and after a while it's been on for
so long
that you you become immune to it like
it's just there and it's still on it's
there in the back of your mind and you
didn't manage to turn it off so the
noise that i describe in life whether
it's your parents expectations whether
it's
society's expectations whether it's your
partner's expectations all of those are
like noise in the background and that
noise drowns out
your ability to understand
the mind and the intelligence that's one
of the biggest trip ups
i was looking at i gave a presentation
called build a life not a resume it's
also one of my popular videos
but very good video thank you man thank
you so much and when i did the research
so you don't see this in the video
because this research didn't make it
into the video but the research that i
was doing was around the most common
resume lies
the truth is over 40 to 50 percent of us
lie on our resumes yeah if you don't
you're missing an opportunity i'll just
say that yeah there you go right so and
i started to dig deeper and i was
looking at you know a lot of people lie
about their dates of employment so
instead of three days it's now three
months you know whatever it may be now i
dug deeper and i wanted to meet some of
these people and speak to people and so
i spoke to people who lie on their
resumes and we know that at least forty
to fifty percent tell us they do
you know the thing is no one was proud
of that no one was like yeah yeah i know
i'm gonna get really what it came down
to is we're really insecure about our
own abilities
really what it came down to is we're not
confident about what we have to offer
what it came down to is a lack of
self-awareness what it came down to is a
lack of understanding what am i good at
what am i passionate about what am i
bringing to the table
that's what people were really worried
about
they were worried about the job but when
you dug beneath the surface the real
behavioral trait that was coming out was
insecurity and being unconfident
about one's potential that that tells us
a lot that indicates a lot about human
behavior and human nature that the noise
from outside
makes us want to fit into a container
and that stops us from differentiating
between what is my mind saying and what
is my intelligence saying and what
happens is that noise becomes your voice
so that noise becomes what you think is
what you're saying
and most people don't realize that until
10 20 30 years down the line how the
hell do you like figure out so your
analogy is great yeah song's on you
don't even realize it's there anymore it
becomes total white noise you're
oblivious to it in fact you'll only
notice it if it gets turned off correct
so how do they identify that like you
have a process for that how do you hear
the thing that you no longer hear
so that you can shut it off yeah
absolutely one of the biggest ones and
we say this all the time but it applies
mostly to this is switching your
association is switching association to
people
right it's like changing your circle
because if you're only hearing the same
thing from that circle the only way to
turn it off without you having to do
mass amounts of reflection
is changing your circle where you start
hearing we all ultimately find the
things we want to hear right we know
that
all right right now in real time you and
i are going to do some cool [__] okay
let's do it let's do it all right so
i created like a little um piece of
content for alexa where i was like okay
what are the the four questions that you
can ask to get because you and i use
different words but i think we're saying
the same thing so i call them invisible
beliefs beautiful so everybody has
invisible beliefs and they're totally
[__] with you yeah i call it noise
yeah so they're they're controlling your
life
and
the only way to get them to stop
controlling your life is actually figure
out what they are and so i gave four
questions that two of them i just
straight stole from albert einstein what
are they um and it's
the most important decision every person
will make in their life is whether they
live in a friendly or a hostile universe
so just make it a question right do you
and so the the point i'll go through all
four but the point was that if you ask
these four questions and they're just
the tip of the iceberg but if you ask
these four questions you're going to
begin to identify your frame of
reference basically just trying to get
people to frame themselves as either
optimistic or pessimistic which i think
is sort of the the big hem-handed like
first thing you need to become aware of
so first um do you live in a hostile or
friendly universe another einstein one
is everything a miracle or is nothing a
miracle right because you get to choose
absolutely so neither one of those is
objectively real but you pick and it's
really going to color how you love it
yeah and then number three
can you do anything you set your mind to
without limitation or are there certain
things you can't comprehend
um and then number four i'm forgetting
right now so i won't waste time because
you get the yeah i get it i love them
they're brilliant brilliant questions so
what like they're woefully incomplete so
what could we add to that that would
really bring this home for people so if
that gets them optimistic pessimistic
what what other at a really high level
yeah sure what are other things that
people could immediately switch or in
fact would immediately switch if they
change you know the people that they're
hanging around but like let's really get
real about what some of those things are
so optimism pessimism what else so for
me there was two questions that i had to
ask myself that that really changed what
i do one of my big questions is what
advice would i give to my younger self
it's huge because i think that's the
stuff that we regret that's the stuff
that we wish we were doing that's the
stuff that has been lost in the noise
when you ask someone what advice would
you give to your younger self the number
one answer is i wish i studied this
i wish i tried this out
i wish i gave this a go you know those
are all things that somebody didn't do
yeah it's all things that things people
didn't do it's always like something
that either should have started or
didn't continue
and that's really tapping into someone's
voice
right that's really tapping into what
someone really wants to do and you're
going way beyond just like oh what do
you like what are you passionate about
so hard to answer that sometimes
especially if you're drowning does that
add to your questions or no no it's
really interesting but now i need to
know what your answer was so i used to
be uh i used to do a lot of spoken word
when i grew up i read the dictionary i
read the thesaurus i loved language
that's what i was fascinated by and for
some reason i gave it up then i found
out about monk life became a monk and
then almost back 10 years on at 28 i was
going i asked myself that question and
my answer was i miss words i miss
expressiveness i miss sharing a message
and stories through
incredible language and ideas potential
rhymes but flow and all of these things
so that was the answer to my question
one of the biggest answers was i wish i
never stopped
writing when did you ask that question i
was actually 28 so two years ago two
years ago what is up my friends i have
huge news for you about one of the most
exciting and important projects i've
ever worked on in my life
as you guys know it is my mission to
help teach people about how to build a
mindset and the skills that they're
going to need to live an extraordinary
life and over the last few months i've
been working hard behind the scenes to
create a brand new tool that will help
you do exactly that it's called project
kaizen and i'm proud to announce that
i'll be bringing it to the world later
this year project kaizen is a web 3
based game like experience that is a
story-based world that's going to allow
you to get inside build an avatar that
is aspirational of who you want to
become and then take the path of the
warrior seeking continuous improvement
inside of a story world and game
experience all right my friend i cannot
tell you how excited i am about this
amazing new project which i think ushers
in a whole new form of entertainment and
i want to meet you inside of project
kaizen and help you have fun with these
ideas of always getting better all right
click the link and join me in discord
and until then my friends be legendary
take care
your content is like the modern version
of spoken word so i don't know if that's
on purpose or an accident but like it
was an accident watching it i was like
[__] like if he
is doing this off the cuff i have to
hate myself a little yeah and if he's
writing it down he performs it so well
yeah that it feels off the cuff but it's
the answer is very impressive thank you
man you're so kind i'm genuinely touched
coming from no no here's the thing like
look and and i love giving compliments
when they're real but more importantly
you complement the thing you want to
reinforce in somebody so you've got a
mission i find it very interesting which
is can we make
knowledge my word i don't remember what
word you use
wisdom perfect so can we make wisdom
spread as far and as fast as
entertainment which is so similar to
what i'm trying to change people's
beliefs through entertainment
so
i recognize the kindred soul right away
and then just watching the content i'm
like whoa like
it's i'm not surprised the number of
views that you've gotten because it's
songs work because they make you feel an
emotion but they also tap into
whatever it is about humans whatever it
is that we convey through rhythm
um so
and and before the cameras were rolling
we were talking about it so the one
thing that makes me very uncomfortable i
do the same called impact quotes and
impact quotes is the first time where i
allowed myself to perform where i'm
knowingly i would not say it like this
if you and i were standing next to each
other right this is for the camera i
know how it's going to be edited i know
we're going to add music to it so it is
a performance
but it's also some of our best
performing content so it's like what you
were saying earlier about look i just
accept that not everybody geeks out on
neuroscience and so i have to understand
like who my audience is and give them
something in in a way that will then
resonate and go viral absolutely and so
i think acknowledging that's really
interesting so anyway i'm responding
just to what you were saying about that
because your life seems to be an echo of
that answer all right so there's a few
more things that you have to get so
i'm here i'm here i'm i'm loving this
and if you're loving it that's even yeah
so
there are three questions that you get
asked a lot what are they
oh the big one is how do i find my
passion okay and you can tell me the
quote you get i need you to answer each
one of them yeah but if you want to run
through what each of the questions are
and then we'll go back
yeah no i'll just do them as they are
perfect so how do i find my passion my
simple model which
is the dharma model it also dharma means
eternal duty in the vedic tradition it's
very similar to what ikigai is being
spoken about today which is a japanese
version of reason for being why do we
live where is meaning coming from and it
talks about an intersect of four areas
what am i good at what do i love
what does the world need and how do i
get paid for it to me those four help
you unlock your passion when you find
the intersect across all of those four
you're making your passion your purpose
you'll unlock your passion you'll find
your purpose this is path one there's
two paths path one i find my skill set
and i engage it to help other people and
become better at it so i'm becoming
better at what i'm good at and i'm using
it to help other people because i'm
aware of what i'm quite good at and i
know what what knowledge i have what
skills i have i have some self-awareness
the other path that people often miss is
actually i just start serving people i
just start helping people and i start to
notice what i enjoy about that and what
i'm good at helping people with so
that's gandhi's part gandhi said that
you find yourself when you lose yourself
in the service of others so for me those
are the two paths of how do i find my
passion and finding the intersect
between those four areas
and the second one is
jay my relationship's falling apart i
get asked that all the time so the
answer to that is much harder
it's harder to summarize it but i always
start with self-actualization that
the problem is we have a list for the
one that we want
and we don't have a list for what we
need to become and i don't mean become
to attract i mean become to just be
to just get to understand yourself you
don't know what you need in your life
until you figure out who you are and so
i find too many people rush into
relationships without really recognizing
and being fully aware of what they need
from a relationship so it all comes back
to how aware are you
how much understanding do you have of
yourself and what you need and what you
want that's my best advice for a
relationship in like a minute and and
then the third question i mostly get
asked is jay what do you read like what
are your favorite books because it seems
you read a lot what are your top three
books they're not groundbreaking in the
sense that people may not be like oh my
god that's the best book i've ever read
for me they changed my life so that's
where i'm coming at a point from
i love start with why by simon sinek and
not because i applied it to businesses
because i applied it to my life and even
today
i'm constantly refining my why that's
all i do every day my deepest morning
routine and practice is to refine why i
do what i do it's so easy for me to now
do it for money it's so easy for me to
now do it for followers it's so easy for
me to now do it for fame
and every day i have to refine that
because i know having lived as a monk
and what i practice that if those become
what i want then i'll forget who i need
to be
so
my daily practice and my daily routine
is refining my intention which in modern
language is why so for me simon's book
helped me do that
the bhagavad-gita which i would love to
do for vedic knowledge what ryan's done
for stoicism
and the bug would get over 5000 years
old and that book really
exemplifies human challenge third book
i'd say this one's going to be hard
because it's the last one
let me think
i'm gonna try throw something else in
there so i've done one like
self-development one more spiritual
enlightened man let me throw a
business book in seeing as i'm sure you
have a lot of business viewers i love
the book exponential organizations i
don't know if you read it
it's by salim ishmael and the
singularity university
and that book for me is an incredible
analysis of the success of all the
organizations we see ruling our phone
today the way it breaks down their
business models and how they were
created to me it's fascinating so if
anyone really wants to start up a
exponential business today then that's
where they have to go and that's when
peter diamandis said that
if you want to be a billionaire
redefining it is someone who impacts the
lives of a billion people
and and that's what that business book
is really about is how do you create an
exponential organization that positively
impacts a billion people so those are my
three for today that's pretty good uh
yeah so all right i've got one more yeah
i want to hear you talk about your three
e's oh what are they why do they matter
so for me my three e's are element
environment and energy everyone has an
element that they thrive in if you take
someone out of it their element they
won't be the same a modern day example
would be michael jordan he was
incredible at basketball he took him out
of basketball put him in the baseball no
one remembers his career we're talking
about one of the best athletes of all
time
your environment is the environment
around you you can take a fish out of
water and give it a beautiful mansion
and a bentley and all the money in the
world but it will die
and that's what we are like our
environment everyone needs an
environment which they thrive which we
have to craft your boss if you're at
work is never going to ask you hey what
environment do you succeed in right like
that never happens so we have to create
an environment where we thrive
and then finally it's energy we some of
us love high energy environments high
pressure
some of us succeed in low energy
environments and low pressure
figuring out your energy and the
frequency on which you operate best will
help you thrive as well so for me those
are the three e's to really create a
thriving environment know your element
know your environment and know your
energy and so at all times
if i see anything going wrong i'm going
is my element out of alignment is my
environment out of alignment or is my
energy out of alignment and that's a
great three question test you can do to
yourself when you don't think things are
going right and all you have to do is
bring that back into alignment for me
growing up in my 20s a monk was somebody
bawled in robes that maybe you bumped
into at the airport who gave you like a
flower and then asked for a donation
like that was a monk right so now seeing
somebody like you who's integrated into
the real world but you tell the story in
the book which i i really won you're
super um open vulnerable maybe has weird
connotations but you were just not
worried about whether the story made you
look cool or not you were just like this
is the thing i struggled with and i was
worried about that whatever and this is
my sort of recursive why why do i want
this what am i worried about
and you begin to realize the things that
are bothering you and one thing happened
early on when you got there and you said
that you were hurt that you were giving
yourself to other people and you didn't
feel like it was being reciprocated
and
the the way that
the monk came back to recontextualize
that for you i found
really important and this is staying on
the steam of the monkey mind which we're
gonna come back to here in a second so
but if you can tell that story i think
it'd be really powerful
yeah i think we all get into these
scenarios in the world where we think
we're trying our best to help and love
other people so i think majority of
people feel
like they give more than they get
and i think anyone who's an empath or
feels like they care for others will
feel i give out so much love but i don't
get as much back
and that's how i felt sometimes in the
ashram now the interesting thing is that
i had forgotten lesson number one in the
ashram and the first lesson in the
ashram was
this is a hospital
there are doctors and patients
but remember the doctors are also
patients
and sometimes the patients may teach the
doctors
but remember that we're all
in the same space in this hospital where
everyone is going through a process of
purification
so that was very clear the ashram was
not meant to be heaven it wasn't meant
to be this idyllic place where everyone
was perfectly zen and calm it was a
place where you had to
learn to develop that even amongst the
challenges that were there just like in
reality
so i'd forgotten that and i was going
well i'm giving out lots of love and no
one's giving me any love and it was
really emotional for me because i just
felt like i was investing in people and
helping people and supporting people and
and i'll never forget that conversation
and even till this day it's become one
of those conversations that
stays with me and i remind myself of
regularly hence i put in the book
the monk said to me said
just as there are people that you love
and don't love you back
there are people in your life
that are investing in you and loving you
that you've forgotten about
and it was one of those like
stop moments of just
is that true and i would encourage
everyone who's listening and watching
right now to really think about that
think about that person you've been
chasing whether it's a friend a
potential boyfriend or girlfriend a
potential husband or wife or whatever it
may be your job
and then ask yourself has someone ever
chased you in life or has someone ever
pursued you in life or has someone ever
tried to love you in life and you didn't
even give them a time of day
the answer is true i could agree with it
i can completely agree with that there
are people in my life who have done more
for me
than i could even begin to try and do
and that isn't just parents and family
members i'm talking about people
professionally that i just can't repay
and so
he spoke about it as a theme called the
circle of love that you will always
get the love you give out you will
always get it back or whatever you give
out you will always get it back you just
won't get it back from the same people
you give it to
and that was really fascinating to me
because i also realized that i may have
caused hurt to people
and they may not have hurt me back
but i've received her from people that i
never heard
and so it works both ways both with her
and love and when you see on both ends
and that's ultimately karma in a in a
tiny nutshell
it's
completely grounding
in saying yeah let me take a real look
at my life
and and where those blind spots are
about who i'm not being grateful to
who i'm missing who i'm not expressing
thanks to
i want to pull some of these threads
together now yeah okay so i love it
you've got the what i'm shorthanding to
the monkey mind which is beliefs that
don't serve you the nature of the mind
to want to covet to compare like all
these things that are
going to take you down we're probably
going to need to get into values of
values down values
but
putting that in the monkey mind category
the things that drive you nuts that
worry you that wake you up in the middle
of the night um
and then you've got this
idea of
beginning to unlearn like so much of
what is
the the lessons that you do in the book
and that you've been saying here today
are often not so much as as giving you
something but taking something away and
saying you're you're thinking about it
in a way that's not helpful that feeds
the monkey mind instead of feeding peace
to get back to your earlier the pursuit
that we're after is peace
tell me the zen story the pouring of the
tea which
is so illustrative of i think exactly
a large portion of what your book is
meant to convey
so
the zen story about the tea and i love
zen stories and the books full of them
as as you know
the zen story is where a student
approaches a zen master and a
teacher and is complaining about all the
challenges in their life
and everything they've got going on
and feels like they also have a sense of
ego if they know everything that's
happening
and the zen master sees a cup that's
full there
and starts pouring tea into this cup
and the cup just starts overflowing and
the students looking at it going like
what are you doing like how does this
make any sense
and and the zen master says well you're
just like this cup
right i can't put any more in you can't
take any more in because you're already
full like you think you're full you
think you're done
and and that's the point that you have
to always go back to that student
mindset you have to always go back to
that
emptiness and i think one of the reasons
why we struggle with that is we think
that when we're full we're safe
our ego makes us believe that when
you're full when you think you know it
all that's when you're safe
the craziest thing is that's when you're
at your weakest
and i think that's what we all miss that
when you think if you think of any
company that's ever thought that they
had figured it out that is when they
were at their most
weakest point if there's a fighter in a
boxing match that thinks that they have
perfected this game
that's why not their weakest when
you're in a relationship and you think
oh my life is perfect and everything's
going great that's when you're at your
weakest but we find safety in certainty
when actually that's what makes us
complacent and lose the plot so that
story illustrates
the need
to always reconnect not that we're empty
that we have nothing
but that there is so much more to gain
there is so much more to learn
yeah that that idea of
if you if you already think you have all
this figured out then i'm not going to
be able to help you so if somebody is
watching this right now with sort of a
cynical eye to yeah i've heard this
before been there done that tried that
you know i'm suffering from anxiety
depression
but jay doesn't know my circumstances
one of the things you talk about is is
how people can begin to slide into a
victim mentality
how how do you help people around that
why
some people really do have it bad so why
do you advise them still to not adopt
the victim mentality
yeah so there's a study that i talk
about in the book that looks at people
who have a victim mindset and by the way
that is a
condition that's adopted you are not a
victim person like you're not a negative
person you just have adopted a negative
sense of thoughts and habits and beliefs
and the study looked at people that had
those beliefs and looked to people who
didn't
and they were asked to think of a time
when they felt they were the victim and
the other people were just asked to
think of a time when they were bored
after that these two sets of people were
asked if they'd like to take part in an
activity of just helping the team that
had created the experiment
and
i think the people that were the victim
mindset were 25
less likely to offer to help and be a
part of this change
and to the degree that sometimes they
left trash behind and even took the pens
that they were given by the
experimenters to the point that you get
so lost in that mentality that you don't
even think about helping and getting out
of it so the reason why the victim
mindset
it is real in the sense that there are
definitely people
in the world
that have a harder situation than others
that's fact there's no
debating that point that there are
people who have it are harder than other
people there are people that have hired
it harder than me but there are also
people that have it easier than me so
i've had it harder than some and same
with you
and
in our small bubbles our hardship feels
like the worst thing that could ever
happen and that's the craziest thing
about pain is that you only think pain
is bad when you're really going through
it and we compare our pain with other
people's pain
we say oh that person's pain can't be
that bad
that person's pain
is probably a bit less than mine you
know we because we've never experienced
it
so the reason why i encourage people to
get out of that mindset
is because that's just a one-way ticket
to a lifelong commitment
to sadness disappointment
lethargy complacency and feeling stuck
and lost there's nothing gained out of
feeling sorry for yourself
i don't think there's anyone that i've
ever heard say saying i'm open to it but
i've never heard anyone say to me that
feeling like a victim my whole life
actually helped me find a victory in
life like i don't think i've ever heard
that i've never read that in a book i've
never heard in a documentary i've never
seen it anywhere so if it's out there
i'm open to it but
when you look at that and you go is this
the life i want to keep living do i
still want to feel this way you look at
someone like sindhutai you look at all
of these incredible people that have
broken barriers you look at people who
were told that uh wilma rudolph was told
she would never
walk again properly or run at age nine
and went went on to be a multiple
olympic gold medalist when you hear that
you're like what really
but that's what's possible
and so no one in the victim mindset has
ever
seen growth from that mindset
but everyone who has traded that victim
mindset for a mindset of acceptance
a mindset of healing
and a mindset of perspective
has found their way out
and the mistake we make is we take tell
people what it's almost like toxic
mindset advice it's like oh stop stop
feeling sorry for yourself just go out
there and do the work
that doesn't work either because that
person needs to accept that they've been
through something painful for themselves
so you can't belittle or devalue
someone's pain
and often people try and belittle and
devalue their own pain to get out of it
but that actually just slows down the
process and then they're back to square
one again so you've got to accept the
pain you went through you've got to
accept that you want to heal it one of
the best ways to explain this is
how what we search for in our partners
or in life
is what we did or didn't get from our
parents
that's interesting like literally what
we search for and i've i've analyzed
this in my life a ton and others if you
look for what you look for in your
partner or for what you look for in life
through your bosses any authorities
anyone who has a position of power in
your life is what you didn't or did get
from your parents
and so you're creating a life based on
your past trauma or your past challenge
that doesn't lead to a positive
relationship i found myself projecting
the patterns the negative patterns
that my parents had into my relationship
with my wife
that doesn't create a positive
experience and by the way i'm not
blaming any parents in the world
everyone's figuring it out so i'm not
even blaming my own but we need to have
the awareness of developing the
emotional skills that our parents didn't
have
so again reminding ourselves of being
aware
that we're literally creating lives
that will continue in the same direction
unless our mindset changes
all right so if we know that people are
struggling with the monkey mind they um
they're telling they're filling their
cup up with a lot of things that are
self-destructive maybe too big of a word
but it's directionally correct that
things that aren't leading them to joy
to peace um
how do we bring the ashram to them how
do we go about you know
beginning the process of healing i know
a big part of your journey was questions
questions questions questions questions
what are the right questions
do we have to meditate is that optional
do we have to give up sex like where
where did we fall when you got to that
part in the book i had to laugh out loud
so what how do we bring the ashram to
people how do we help them like now
start doing things specifically to empty
their cup to refill it with something
that's going to lead to to peace and to
joy and yeah the first thing i'd say is
i think everyone needs
the feeling that they can just come up
for some air
life can often feel like someone's
literally
drowning you and you feel like you're
drowning and floundering especially if
you're in an extreme case of anxiety or
stress or depression
and i feel like you just need to feel
like you can just come up for a tiny bit
of air so for that in the book i talk
about the 3s model which is your sights
sense and sounds
what we see
what we hear and what we smell has a
profound impact on our mental state and
we actually underestimate our sense and
i'll give you an example all of us have
been walking around with masks and
someone said this to me the other day
and it hit me
they were saying to me that now that we
all were lost and do this the whole time
i think my mom's over there they were
doing this all the time they realized
they couldn't hear people properly
and the reason they couldn't hear people
properly is they realize they don't use
their ears they use their eyes
to see people's lips
and so actually they're not even using
their ears that much they're using their
eyes to follow the lips and know what
someone's saying
so actually we depend so much on our
eyes
in every interaction
how many times have you been looking at
someone attractive and you forgot what
they were talking about
right you're just so engaged with your
eyes that you completely even forgot to
listen
right or you're so lost in in the vision
of something again and you're in a daze
you can't smell anything you can't taste
anything
so
we've got to learn to reactivate our
senses so i'll give an example of what i
mean as monks
our life was sight designed sound
designed and scent designed
what's the first thing you see when you
wake up in the morning for 80 percent of
people the first thing they see in the
morning is their phone and the last
thing they see at night is their phone
that is poor sight design because you
don't even choose what the first message
of the day your mind receives it
actually made my stomach drop
that's a gnarly thought it's true yeah
right imagine the last thing someone
sees is not their partner or their
spouse the person they sleep with they
see their phone and the first thing in
the morning they look at is their phone
and guess what it's not a good site but
you're looking at a message that you
didn't design for your mind you're
looking at a picture or an image that
maybe came through on your instagram
feed that you didn't choose for your
mind so now you've started your day with
envy jealousy comparison competition
collab like all of the all of the monkey
mind stuff and the monkey mind is
excited the monkey mind's on the monkey
might say yeah we're ready to go and now
you've started the day with the monkey
mind so my advice is
start your day with a quote that you
love
start your day with a picture of someone
that you love or your family start your
day with a work of art that inspires you
start your day with seeing the first
thing that you see make it so closely
connected to your soul and your goal and
your purpose
that your monk mind naturally comes
alive
so as monks the first thing that we saw
was sometimes a teaching that we'd keep
next to us it might be a spiritual text
where i just ripped it out of a book and
stuck it there next to my bed so i woke
up to that
just wake up to something that you
actually want to see when you wake up
and make it intentional and make it
focused it could even be a reminder on a
sticky note i remember for a long time i
had one when i was a monk that said i am
not this body
just to disconnect from the fact that i
was more than this body and because we
didn't have mirrors in the ashram it was
very easy to forget i was this body
or i've had other ones where that say to
me i'm exactly where i need to be and
i've read that in the morning and that
just reminds me because so often i wake
up feeling anxious that i'm behind on my
day or i'm late and then i actually make
up a mess whereas if i read i'm exactly
where i need to be and i remind myself i
can start my day there so that's sight
this and that's simple easy for anyone
to do you don't have to change your mind
you don't need to meditate you have to
do anything the second one is let's talk
about scent design now one of the things
i've been missing during quarantine is
going to a spa
or going to like a resort because i love
massages and i love spas and like me and
my wife love getting away
and if you think about it whenever you
go into a spa or a massage space or
whatever they're called or a resort
you can always feel relaxed from the
moment you walk in just through the
power of scent
it could be the most basic room in the
world
but a scent can literally illuminate a
whole room
so scents like eucalyptus lavender
sandalwood if you've got a diffuser or a
candle and you can make this a part of
your routine
before you start your work day just have
a candle that you breathe in for four
seconds and breathe out for four seconds
have a diffuser in your room
that just makes you feel calm because as
soon as you walk in one thing i've been
doing is putting eucalyptus drops into
my showers and turning into a natural
steam and i just feel like completely
relieving all my sinuses and and feeling
calm these are just really practical
things you can do to just ease yourself
into it
and the third one's sound this one's so
powerful
sound is underestimated because now we
just have
music playing all the time in the
background and the music may not even be
intentional and the lyrics are all over
the place and
you've got instruments that are not
being played well or in harmony and you
get a pump or like a
boost out of it and i've i learned about
sound in the ashram
and we had sound design we would wake up
to nature sounds
and nature's so aligned with your body
and mind if you look at nature if you
breathe in with the ocean
your breath will just be exactly where
it needs to be
if you
allow yourself to just be present with
the wind you'll feel your body just slow
right down and be calm nature just has
this amazing way of teaching so many
lessons
and so when i lived in new york city i
often found myself getting exhausted and
i started looking into it i was thinking
what is it i work out i do all this
stuff
and i realized that especially in new
york we deal with a lot of
insignificant sound you know something
called cognitive load where your brain
is processing irrelevant in significant
sound of trucks
horns
construction work and drilling
and so when your ears are trying to make
sense of insignificant sound you're
losing energy
in an irrelevant way
and so sound design means every room in
your home
have a song that plays or music that
plays in that room that gives you the
feeling you want it to have another easy
way to do that is before you start work
or while you're working
have a song or a playlist that really
gets you into the mode that you want to
be in when you're doing that
sound is a beautiful accomplice to any
activity you want so those are three
simple ways that anyone starting today
can bring the ashram to their home by
sight scent and sound design because
that's how our lives were designed
now what about things like
the
taking a chore washing dishes um
servicing the animals like
should people build something into their
day where it's like i'm gonna do this
thing that i don't necessarily like but
i'm going to imbue it with something to
remind myself that even in a task as
mundane as washing dishes i can be fully
present i can um you know find the joy
in doing it well and i think you talk
about watching it go you know from
grease cover to you know just sparkling
clean and just sort of
re-contextualizing is that a powerful
thing that that people should work in
like i want to create that like perfect
day like we're you know like how do we
how do we make full monk use of our
quarantine i love it i love it yeah no
absolutely i think i'm trying to think
of things that everyone does i think
washing your dishes is something
everyone does every day or it's a common
thing that people do
and
you've got to realize that what you're
doing is not washing the dish like in
terms of that's not actually what you're
doing what you're doing is training your
mind for presents
and the reason why that's so powerful is
because most of us when we're washing
the dishes i need to watch that netflix
show i've got 30 minutes before you know
like i'm gonna sleep late if i don't see
it so now you're already
trying to figure out what you're doing
next
and that bleeds into the rest of your
life
so now when you're finally on that guess
what this is it everyone's going through
quarantine and lockdown going i need to
travel i need to travel i need to get
out
and when you live like that when you're
traveling you'll be thinking i need to
do work i need to get back to work i
need to get my career back on track and
when you're at work you're going to be
like i need to get away again and that's
literally the repetitive cycle that
we're all living in so when you're just
washing your dish
in a present way you're not washing a
dish you're training your mind to be
where you physically are
and the best way to do that is give it
meaning like you said or do something
that makes you more present at the time
you could if you really wanted to
wash the dish
and listen to your favorite song you
could watch this and listen to this
podcast you could watch the dish and do
something that is good for your mind
that helps you be more present and
conscious at the time so you may say i
don't have enough time to wash the
dishes for 10 minutes like one dish for
10 minutes and i'm not asking you to do
that what i'm saying is
don't constantly be in a rush
to get onto something you want to do
because then when you're doing what you
want to do you'll be in a rush to get on
a thing you have to do
and that cycle never stops and and i
think that's the never-ending cycle that
we're in that we always feel
we're ahead or behind we always feel
we're never where we're meant to be
and that's the root of all of our
suffering in life
is that i don't feel i am where i
actually are meant to be what is up my
friend tom bill you here and i have a
big question to ask you how would you
rate your level of personal discipline
on a scale of one to ten if your answer
is anything less than a ten i've got
something cool for you and let me tell
you right now discipline by its very
nature means compelling yourself to do
difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact i will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right i've just released a class from
impact theory university called how to
build iron-clad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work i will see you inside
this workshop from impact theory
university until then my friends be
legendary peace out
so one thing i want to talk about
obviously having lived in london um
knowing a little bit about what it's
like to grow up as an indian kid in
england uh how on earth did you buck the
trend of you once said uh growing up in
in an indian household you're either a
doctor or a lawyer or a failure yes
that's right yeah so
how like how would you not fall prey to
that yeah those were my three options
right that was it there was no fourth
option so according to my parents family
or the community i grew up in i'm a
failure that's crazy and
how did i back the trend
i was really
really fortunate
that very early on i started to
experiment with what mattered to me
sometimes i got me in a lot of trouble
what people don't know about me is that
i was suspended from school three times
for
trying out all sorts of things like
things that people would never imagine
of someone who goes on to be a monk i
was experimenting with all the drugs in
the world i had multiple relationships i
was really trying to search for some
sort of meaning fulfillment and as far
as long as i've known i've been chasing
thrill i really value thrill and feeling
like you might not see that coming yeah
i know not many people do it's it's very
different from 14 to 18 i was like this
kid who just wanted to try new things
out
and my parents rhetoric would always be
well make sure you get good grades and i
used to think well if i can be bad and
get good grades then then it all works
right everyone's happy so that's that's
kind of what i did
and at 18 i was really fortunate when i
met a monk
and this monk was invited to speak and i
kind of just went because one of my
friends forced me to at that time i was
listening to ceos and entrepreneurs and
business people and marketers who who i
thought that's what i was aspiring to be
like and then i hear this monk
and he captivated me like no one had
ever captivated me before
it was like staring at the most
beautiful woman on the planet you know i
was completely fixated on him and his
message and that is the beginning
without going into too much detail
before we probe
that was the beginning of what changed
me
because i went from being someone who
did only want all those things to become
successful
and trying to but i started hearing my
own inner voice
much more in all that noise that i had
around me i remember one of my my
parents had a maths tutor for me because
they wanted to be amazing at maths and i
was i was pretty good at numbers and i'd
have this tutor and he'd tell me that he
goes the reason that you're struggling
with the next question
is because you're always worried about
what your parents think
and and that really stayed in my head i
was just like wow so as long as i'm
trapped by what my parents think i can
actually never find the answers to the
real questions of life
and there are all these little things
happening i lost two great friends when
i was 16. one girl died in a car
accident one guy died because he was
involved in drugs and violence
that that made me rethink everything i
just thought to myself wait a minute
these were beautiful people
people that i loved
people that in my opinion were good
people
and i just lost them in a moment and it
was kind of like this collation of
little things that just made me think
wait a minute having money
having fame
this that
just doesn't seem to add up and then and
then meeting the monk kind of made that
shift possible and as i said he was
completely captivating and then i found
out that he'd given up jobs in google
and microsoft to be a monk
and i thought to myself who does that
you know he's given up everything that
i'm chasing
and that all my friends are chasing
but he seems happier than anyone i've
ever met before
and he spoke about this incredible
principle where he said that we should
plant
trees
under whose shade we do not plan to sit
and he was speaking about this principle
of selfless sacrifice and that kind of
just penetrated me right there when he
said the words selfless sacrifice
for the first time in my life i felt a
thrill about something that i'd never
felt before i thought wow
giving up
everything you have for the service of
others
sounds like the best thing you could
possibly do and i don't know why i had
that thought because i wasn't a
spiritual kid growing up i wasn't a
religious kid growing up i wasn't even a
good kid growing up i was just a rebel a
misfit trying things out and
experimenter which i still consider
myself and so what i started to do is i
was interning
at companies and firms and corporates
thinking i was getting a grad job
afterwards and then i'd spend the rest
of my summer holidays interning in india
living with him as a monk so i'd use all
my summer and christmas holidays to just
be out there with the monks and he
introduced me to another 200 to 500
monks that were just like him just as
smart just as bright giving up
everything they had and using all their
skills to make the world a better place
so i want to go back
so
to why that resonated with you which is
really surprising so and maybe you're
just you know so far ahead of where i
was at the time but that would have
sounded absurd to me
at that time yeah um did you already
have a sense of unease that like i'm a
rebel without a cause or like
what was it about that moment and you
you you seem very aware of yourself so
i'm hoping that some of that awareness
was present then like what was that
moment
i believe the moment was i was i've
always had friends who were older than
me
and i could see a lot of them in the
most successful careers successful jobs
beautiful partners whatever it was but i
saw a sense of lack of fulfillment
meaning and purpose in their lives
and i've always been an observer and i
would see these people who are like five
years older than me seven years older
than me maybe 10 years older than me
and i'd be watching them and go is that
the life i want and often the advice i
give to people today is fast forward
where you are
look at yourself in 10 15 20 years time
and ask yourself the question
is that where i want to be
if you're in a company look at the
person who's 20 years ahead of you and
ask yourself is that where i want to be
if you're in a startup look at where
other startups have got to in similar
roles and go is that where i want to be
and if the answer is no
then you need to find a new path
and for me the answer at that time from
observing was no the path that my
parents or society or the university i
went to or the community i had that was
carving out for me
it didn't feel like the path for me so i
was almost seeking
an alternative or a new path i was just
so fortunate that it happened to be an
uplifting powerful path as opposed to
something that could have actually taken
me down the wrong road because that
could have been possible too
so walk me through the first time you
step off the plane in india it's summer
and so i'm living there i'm waking up
i'm almost doing all the practices just
as if you were shadowing a ceo i'm just
shadowing a monk and so i'm just
shadowing his lifestyle so we wake up
he's like one of the most elite monks so
we're waking up at like 2 a.m every day
after sleeping at like 9 or 10 p.m and
then we study these ancient vedas which
are 5 000 plus years old together and we
spend two hours and i'm studying with
the best of the best here so
he can like analyze and assimilate and
i'm learning fast taking notes then 4am
we go to collective meditation
we do those practices with the other
monks as well
6 am we have personal meditation so i'm
literally going through the life of a
monk and falling in love with it step by
step going wow i've never had this
experience before i just threw myself in
and i was practicing it to the tee
right it wasn't like oh no my back hurts
when i sit on the floor i can't stay
here for too long or you know today when
people are like oh i can't meditate for
longer than two minutes i was like no
i'm gonna do it for two hours if that's
what they're doing i'm gonna give it a
go because i can only test the
hypothesis will only be true
if the experiment is carried out to the
degree that they are so if the
hypothesis is if you live like this you
are happy more fulfilled
then i want to do that all right so
let's explore this then through the lens
of creating one's own perfect life yes
which is pretty interesting especially
because
interesting because i think this is so
accurate to the way that most people are
it's not like oh there's some grand
missing thing in my life but you took
that first action so codify this for me
or or for anybody that wants they don't
know what their ideal life looks like
they just know that they're not living
it yet so
uh step number one is take it seriously
to find out if the hypothesis is true or
not you have to take the um the the
experiment you have to do it sincerely
um what comes after that i think even
one step before that is is opening
yourself up to new role models and new
experiences
see we live in echo chambers
we're just surrounded by the same
thinking how often do you bump into a
monk you know it just doesn't happen you
don't have no one has a dinner party and
goes oh yeah we just invited the monk
you know from town like the local monk
like no one ever does that and so
we meet people who are just like us most
of the time
and we talk about this in business all
the time if you want to be a billionaire
spend time with billionaires if you want
to be a millionaire spend time with
millionaires if you want to be a tech
startup spend time with you know that's
that's the common rhetoric that we hear
all the time
but what if you want to find purpose and
master the mind there's no one better
than a monk who's mastered the mind so
for me the first step is just opening
yourself up to new experiences and new
role models
because most of us can't see ourselves
in people so then we try and fit
ourselves into the boxes that we do see
and and i mean there's this beautiful
quote that i've been saying it
everywhere and i wish i wrote it but i
didn't so it's by a philosopher and
writer named cooley
and he said that today i'm not what i
think i am i'm not what you think i am
i am what i think you think i am
right and just let that blow your mind
for a moment it's uh it's so powerful
i'm not what i think i am i'm not what
you think i am
i am what i think you think i am
so we live in this perception of a
perception of ourselves
hence my identity is made by what my
parents think i should be my identity is
made up by what my college or university
thinks i should achieve
while you're living in that bubble in
that echo chamber
getting to what you really want to do is
impossible because maybe that just
doesn't fit and i think so many people
feel that way today
that they don't fit into the current
education system they don't fit with the
three or four or five careers that
you're taught exist
so
that process of self-excavation and
actualization
first requires being exposed you can't
be what you can't see if i never saw a
monk i would never have wanted to be a
monk if i never meet a billionaire i
wouldn't want to be one because i
wouldn't know what that feels like i
don't know what it looks like i don't
know what it takes
and i think that's the biggest challenge
of our society that we're not exposed so
that's the first step being exposed to
unique experiences and role models
second step is finding that experience
or role model that you're passionate
about and exactly like you said taking
it seriously shadow them network with
them spend time with them observe them
even from afar it takes that observation
being addicted to observing that
person's lifestyle
and then the third step is going yes or
no
does that work for me
not everyone who's going to go off and
become a monk is going to feel like the
way i did and that's cool
but not everyone is going to go and
follow and shadow a billionaire and go
that's exactly the lifestyle i want they
may want the result but do they want the
hard work that goes with it and so for
me that's the third step it's observing
focusing shadowing getting as close to
the process of that individual and then
going yes or no do i want that process
not do i want the result everyone wants
to be that monk who's fully enlightened
you know can walk through has an
incredible aura that people just
gravitate towards but when you realize
he has to wake up at 2 a.m every day and
sleeps about four to six hours you're
like ah you know i don't want to do it
that doesn't sound like me all right so
yeah a couple things one you said he's
as powerful as he is yeah find power for
me
power being
so from amongst perce perspective the
greatest power
is to be self-controlled
to be able to train the mind and energy
to focus it exactly where you want it
and when you want it to be
you are completely detached and
undeterred from external ups and downs
you're able to navigate anything that
seems
tough challenging fun excitement with
the same amount of being equipoised and
balanced in equanimity
without being too excited in pleasure or
being too depressed in pain
but knowing how to navigate every
situation to me that's great strength
and great power um i heard in one of
your talks you were saying that if you
look at um a literal lifeline a
heartbeat for instance you know it's
it's up and it's down and people have
this sense that something like
enlightenment would be
that um the equanimity forever yeah and
just an even keel and you said but what
what does that resemble it resembles a
flat line when you die correct so what
is it like what i love about you is you
sort of went into the wilderness of
being a monk but you brought it back to
the real world
because when you talk about a monk you
talk about them being detached and that
to me seems like the only real way to
have that sort of super even keel
existence which is not appealing to me
personally so if you're bringing back
that notion of power of having control
over yourself not letting your emotions
take you everywhere but knowing that
life is is the series of ups and downs
what does that power look like when it's
brought back absolutely and actually
that's the whole aim of monk training
it's it's more like a training system
than it is a lifelong commitment it is
bringing that mindset into the real
world where you get to test it now i got
to do that for real
when i left being a monk around five
years ago
and
when i left it was like oh my god i'm in
the real world now again real world i
have to think about how to apply all
this i'm gonna test for real
all this stuff that i've learned and i
was scared like i was nervous i was
anxious and all those things that i've
been trained not to be
rushed back
because
for the first time in my life i had to
really put it into practice and i love
that feeling i'm so glad that i had to
do that so for me actually the mindset
is completely
trainable to bring into the real world
that's that's what i'm trying to do
and what it allows you to do is it
allows you to grain clarity and
perspective when you need it because you
know when you can just take a bird's-eye
view from something
you know when you need to get close into
something you know when you need to pull
back from something there's a beautiful
verse in the bhagavad-gita that says
that detachment is not that you owe
nothing
detachment is that nothing owns you
and i love it because to me that
summarizes detachment in a way that it's
not usually explained
usually people see detachment as being
away from everything actually the
greatest detachment is being close to
everything and not letting it consume
and own you
and that's real power that's real
strength how many people do we know that
have had fame and then that fame has
ruined them
so for me that definition of detachment
is possible to practice even in the real
world rather than saying oh i'm just
gonna have a really simple life i'm just
gonna have nothing in life what was the
best part about being a monk the best
part about being a monk is that your
morning routine and practices are so
powerful
that you can actually aspire
for more incredible values in life
because your mind is clear because your
mind is clear
and you have
that ability to have more clarity so you
can seek that which is which is higher
so i'll give an example of what i mean
define is that where you're about to
define what is higher yes exactly so for
me
being able to overcome ego
being able to overcome envy
being able to overcome jealousy being
able able to overcome the negative of
competitive state there's a positive
competitive state and there's a negative
competitive state today when people are
looking on instagram or facebook or
youtube
all you're looking at is oh she got that
many likes or he got that many likes she
got engaged or he got married or oh my
god look at her body or look at that
and it's like that stuff's destroying us
inside envy jealousy ego greed
to be able to have enough clarity to
purify yourself of those things is going
to alleviate
the biggest anxieties and depressions of
our time and mental health problems
and and we know that we know that
because all the mental health research
today suggests that things like
isolation overexposure we now can have
more pain
consumption in one day because of what
we're exposed to than the pain we would
have had in a lifetime that's huge like
that's ridiculous to think that in one
day because of the media news and social
media we consume more negative than we
did in a lifetime
for me being able to have time
energy and clarity to focus on
self-purification
that is the best thing about being a
monk
because you have that time reflection
and a process
and an environment that only allows you
to become more purified of those things
so
if i was the interviewer that i wanted
to be i would have asked you this
question when we were on the topic but
i'm going to go back just because it's
important enough um you gave us the
three ways that you can really construct
your ideal life but define an ideal life
for me
so an ideal life for me is a life and
this applies to a company an
organization an institution for me
is an ideal life is when we all have a
head a heart and a hand all three
elements together working in alignment
without one or the other we start to
lose something if you only have a head
and a heart
you will find that life is stable and
defined yeah sure sure sure
so ahead
is the clarity of vision
what you want what you want
knowing what you want the way you
picture life and being able to navigate
and make the decisions to get there
that's a good head
a good heart
is being able to understand what your
intuition and heart wants being able to
connect and tap into that understanding
deeper and beyond the vision you may
have painted for yourself so i often say
to people that you'll get to where you
want in life just not in the way you
imagined and that's because
the path that's paved up and down
is far different to the path we pave so
you can have a great head and a great
vision and a great mission and know
where you want to go
but if your heart's not able to have
that resilience and be able to adapt
and and have compassion and care and all
of that then then you're not going to be
able to make the toughest decisions
without your heart but to be able to
realize that we need to
care and be sustainable and long-lasting
requires a heart and a hand is that
service
wanting to pass that on that which you
have wanting to give it forward pay it
forward the idea of serving with what
you have i often say to people your
passion is for you your purpose is for
others
your passion makes you happy but when
you use your passion to make a
difference in someone else's life that's
a service that's a purpose and that's
the hand
so those are my three
elements of an ideal life
i want to know how close to
encapsulating the notion of thinking
like a monk can you get like how like if
you were to give somebody just a
nutshell notion
of what that means what would you say
i'd say it means to live a life
in alignment
and what that means
is that you live a life where what you
think
what you say and what you do
are aligned with your truest self and
what i mean by your truest self
is the self that was not given to you by
your parents
or by your education or by media or
movies or not the self that you've
created to function in the world so i
think if you strip away
all of those expectations obligations
and opinions
what you're left with
if you live in alignment with that then
you're thinking like a monk all right so
that is the very thing i want to get to
so dharma
which is a word that i knew only from
jack kerouac and the whole title of
dharma bums which i have not read but
that notion was always very interesting
to me so one of the questions i get
asked a lot probably the thing i get
asked more than anything is how to find
your passion
and
to me hearing you talk about dharma and
identifying your essence
it really aligns with that idea
can you explain like what is the
definition of dharma is it different
than finding your passion is it like
what is one's true essence when those
things are stripped away like how do you
begin to
to approach that as a person or a monk
quite frankly
so yeah the word dharma means a lot of
things and it's always hard to translate
ancient sanskrit words into modern day
english but the closest two definitions
are your true nature
and your eternal purpose so it's almost
like this is something that's already
existing it's already almost part of
your dna and part of your makeup
and it's allowing that to be completely
unleashed but i break it down in the
book to make it really simple because
just like you the amount of people that
say to me jay what's my passion
what's my purpose so i use dharma to be
described as the word purpose
and then i create this formula
or this mathematical equation for how to
unlock purpose
and to make it simple and obviously
people can dive into the book and do the
questions and everything else that's in
there it's passion
plus strengths
plus compassion
equals purpose
and i'm going to say that again because
i love to break it down because i'm
going to break each of these down for
you as well that passion
plus strengths
plus compassion
equals purpose or dharma and this is
also similar with the concept of ikigai
in the japanese terminology which is
reason for being so you find these in a
lot of ancient traditions
but now let's focus on the word passion
how do you know what your passion is
so
to break it down i've been thinking that
purpose is like an adult
passion is like a teenager
interest is like a child
and curiosity is the womb
so the birthplace of passion
is actually curiosity and interest
and i think we waste so much time trying
to be like what am i really passionate
about what do i really believe in
that's going to take years to figure out
and i've heard you say this too that's
going to take experimenting it's going
to take testing
but the thing you can start with right
now is the simplest form of
what am i curious about what am i
interested in
let me take a course on that or let me
take a seminar on that or let me go and
try that or let me shadow someone who's
done that and that experimenting process
is the only way to unlock your passion
so to me that's step one
the other way of approaching your
passion
is through compassion
so actually a lot of people find their
passion through pain they find it
through pain that they went through
pain of someone that they loved and lost
pain of someone who went through a
physical ailment in their life or
something that they went through and
then that becomes their passion that
they've seen the worst horrific type of
pain and they never want to see it again
and that becomes what
illuminates their passion to them
and so compassion is another way
and actually sometimes a simpler way
because we all know what pain we don't
want to feel again and we all know what
pain we don't want someone else to feel
again why do you think so many people
struggle with this and why do they
struggle so much to find the answer for
themselves to answer in that order
i think we care so much
because deep inside of us we know
that meaningful work has a reward
and i think we know that because we know
that meaning less work has no reward and
i think everyone at some point in their
life has done some form of meaningless
work whether that was you tapping away
on the buttons in a corporate company
whether that was you doing paperwork and
filing an admin for that office job you
did one summer or whether you were
flipping burgers and
doing you know frying fries or whatever
it was like everyone's done something
that didn't satisfy them and by the way
all of those things i've just said could
be really satisfying to someone else
and that's the crazy thing about passion
that it's not linked to a particular
activity for everyone it could be
completely different there's a great
study from the yale school of management
that i talk about in the book
and amy vrznewski and her team tried to
find work that they thought would be
considered challenging
and they found that they looked at
hospital cleaners and hospital workers
because they thought that might be some
of the challenging
and sometimes the the filthy work that
people may have to do can you imagine
like cleaning up after people pass away
or cleaning up after they just
like urinate or whatever it may be
they're cleaning bed sheets they're
cleaning toilets
and so they asked some of the people
that worked in these hospitals to define
their job
most of them as expected said
meaningless
insignificant low skilled and basically
they read their personnel manual
the interesting thing is they ask the
same question to people
different people doing the same job
but this time the answer was different
these
different people doing the same job said
that they did highly skilled work
it was highly fulfilling and they saw
themselves as healers they saw
themselves as carers and they saw
themselves as transformative in the
healing process of their patients
because they saw themselves in
connection to someone actually
recovering and being better
the whole notion of dharma
to me hit home really hard in that story
in the book and you talk about one of
the people in particular who was
changing like the photographs out for
people so that they had something new to
see and somebody asked her like is that
part of your job
and what was her response i thought this
this summed up dharma for me in a really
visceral way
yeah it was it's not part of my job
it's how i see my job right it's how i
perceive what i do and the term is job
crafting
where you have assigned meaning
to the task you've assigned meaning
to the experience that you're now
fueling that work
rather than letting the job description
be your only definition of it yeah when
she was stepping into that and saying
like okay i knowing who i am and knowing
how i feel and what it means to me to
take care of this person to look at a
small detail like that and to imbue this
thing which somebody else might think of
as you know sort of a gross job or
whatever but to bring the beauty that i
want to bring to it
it it's me recognizing she didn't use
the words dharma but it's me recognizing
my purpose it's me
like not asking what's the definition of
the job but instead how do i bring my
truest purpose the unique way that i
would do this job and bring that to this
situation now this is where your book
got really interesting for me is this
interesting interplay between
there's a
a sense of your essence who you are and
then there is
bringing that into the things that you
do and so you could take something you
talk about like cleaning the
um the monastery like in the tiny tiny
little ways but how what you would do is
you would think about cleaning this i
imagine myself cleaning my my own heart
and so now it becomes not actually
polishing a monastery it becomes like
the spiritual pursuit of
recognizing one that even as you get to
the end of cleaning it's dirty again and
so it's this continual thing but that
was
that that
being able to begin to tease those
things out that some things will seem
really boring and dull but you can imbue
them with meaning and then there's this
thing inside of you that when you align
to the things that you like and that you
enjoy
is like the the sort of raw responses
there but you can also create a response
yeah and how do you
help people like bring those together
you talked a little bit about it with
job crafting but how do you get people
out of a woe is me mentality into
you know finding ways to to make their
life beautiful i really believe that you
have to seek
the love and the beauty that you want in
what you have now
because that way you're training
yourself
to extract meaning right now which means
in the short term
if you can like those hospital workers
we're doing if you can fill that role
with meaning and your true passion and
what's coming from you
then that's going to lead you to
discovering the power of it and i saw
that in my own life when i came back
from being a monk
and i worked in the corporate world
i was teaching meditation and
mindfulness and the things that i talk
today
in the corporate world
and i remember in 2014 i was invited by
one of our executives to teach
mindfulness
to a thousand of my peers at twickenham
rugby stadium
and i was speaking in between the ceo
and will greenwood who won the rugby
world cup with england
and and i'm sitting there in the
audience as a complete nobody
and completely around people of my same
age we all make the same money no one
knows who i am
and there i'm sitting there going how am
i going to share mindfulness but after
doing that experience i realized that
even though my job was digital strategy
and social media innovation and i was a
consultant
i was bringing my passion to the
workplace
which actually gave me confidence that i
could do this outside of the workplace
and that's how the two ideas connect
that when you find how you can apply it
to your small world you then get the
confidence and the courage to take it
out and make something real of it
whereas i think a lot of us are waiting
for that break to get into doing it in
reality but we actually haven't even
tested it or experimented on it in in a
small space where we can develop our
our own confidence and courage around it
so i think there's there's two things
that um are going to be important for
people to understand if their your book
reads like a how-to manual which to me
is is the ultimate power in a book and
there's two things you touch on that
play into this and one of them is the
monkey mind and then the other is what
you just talked about with strengths now
the reason i see those two things is
coming together is a lot of times people
they don't know what their strengths are
or maybe they haven't even spent time
developing their strengths
and the monkey mind is either saying
it's unfair that things are so hard for
you that you have to develop them it's
unfair that you know at the ashram i was
because i know that you had health
trouble at the ashram which sort of
began this process of maybe i'm not
meant to be here forever and so some
people are going to be it's unfair that
that happened for me and that i find
myself you know now at accenture which
is exactly what i was trying to avoid
and
and or it's
the thought of speaking between the ceo
and this famous rugby player spins them
off into
um
imposter syndrome and i'm never going to
be able to do this and the anxiety takes
flight and then they just aren't able to
do it so how do you help people
develop their strengths and recognize
what their strengths are in the first
place and calm that monkey mind so that
they can see clearly
this is this is why i love tom
you're just amaze i mean tommy you're
literally explaining my book for me i'm
just like this is like the biggest
masterclass of the book it's great
no and you're spot on that
the monkey mind is what we all
experience every day so the monkey mind
is jumping from branch to branch it
doesn't want to focus on the root of the
issue it wants to find the next banana
it wants to find the next excuse it
wants to find the next instant
gratification right that's the monkey
mind and so the monkey mind is never
going to help you focus on your
strengths
and the reason going back to one of the
earlier questions you ask the reason why
we struggle to find our passion is
because the world has constantly pushed
us away from our strengths
we've constantly told to focus on your
weaknesses oh you've got three a's and a
d you should be working on that d let's
get that up to an a
right i remember
in my school
they had this excruciating exercise
where you'd be ranked
1 to 180
on every subject every year
and they'd send the list home to your
parents so there were 180 students in my
year group and every subject art math
english science geography history you
name it you were ranked 1 to 180 in
every subject based on your test results
and scores
and that was like painful when my
parents received that and the crazy
thing was i would always outperform
always in art design philosophy and
economics i was in english i was always
in the top
half if not in the top quarter if not in
the top five
right of my whole year group and stuff
like science and geography and math i
was kind of like in the middle
and and towards the bottom end of my
year now granted i went to a competitive
school so i was still okay at those
things
but the interesting thing was that my
parents and my friends parents would
never look at what you came one or two
or three in they'd be looking at the
things you came 90 hundred and 110 in
and so we've all been programmed to say
oh your strengths are they're fine
they're good the way they are but why
are you not performing at this
and so the one way to know your
strengths
is to ask yourself what do you do
that you feel the most confidence doing
and it could be something as simple as
i'm great at organizing birthday parties
it could be like that may be your skill
right that may be your strength or it
may be something like i'm really good at
putting on makeup
or it could be that i have a great sense
of fashion
it could be any of those things and if
you don't know it yet
you can also do an exercise where you
sit down with a colleague a family
member and a friend because you need
people from all areas of your life and
you ask them what do you think i do
that i excel in that i stand out in or
if you could trust me
to do one thing
in your life for you what would that one
thing be
and when you ask that to people in a
reflective way really asking for that
presence
you might be surprised by what they say
and that's such a powerful question to
ask because someone may actually say
something like to you like jay i think
your greatest strength is
just
knowing what to say to me when i most
need it
and you may think well that's not a
strength you can do anything with
but it is
it is a strength that you can do a lot
with if you are okay with accepting that
of course i want someone to say to me oh
jay you're you're an athlete like
cristiano ronaldo and you could play
football and get the ballon d'or and win
all these trips but that's not my
reality
and so i feel that that's
the place that i would start with
strengths and there was a great study
done on
the healthy wealthy and wisest people in
the world
and they were asked if you could
invest in what you're good at
your average at or what you're bad at
where would you put your money and so if
you take a hundred percent how would you
divide that as a ratio
and if you ask this i want everyone
who's listening and watching at home
right now to do this exercise
and you may write down 33 33 33 you may
write down 40 40 20 you may write down
10 10 80. whatever you write down
the most healthy wealthy wisest
successful people on the planet will say
theirs is a hundred zero zero or eighty
ten ten they go all in on their
strengths
because they know that if they go all in
on their strengths they can become
exceptional at it
now here's the caveat
when it comes to your hard skills focus
on your strengths
but when it comes to your soft skills
focus on your weaknesses now you got to
tell me which is which yeah so hard
skills are things like excel math
uh product design
using a video camera
uh script writing speaking these are all
hard skills in the sense that they're
very clearly defined very tangible
uh you can really measure them it's
almost like a skill that's measurable
your soft skills are like emotional
intelligence
listening
compassion empathy these are all soft
skills or considered soft skills
and those are where you focus on your
weaknesses because they can actually end
up tripping you up while you're trying
to become the best at doing the hard
skill so you may be the best
videographer in the world but if you
don't know how to listen to your
community and your team then no one's
going to want to work with you
and so to me that's the missing link
that we're actually the other way around
we put all our emphasis on getting
better at our weaknesses and our hard
skills
and we think that because we're
empathetic and good people that that
will be enough and it doesn't work that
way
that's one of the things that i loved
about your book is there's a real
so you spend three years in an ashram
removed from everything but end up
coming back and obviously had spent your
entire youth thinking that you were
going to go on the same path that most
people growing up and london or any
other industrialized nation is going to
end up not taking that path think it's
forever end up coming back and so
there's this real understanding of the
duality of you have a spiritual life but
then you also have to pay bills and keep
the lights on and
so that um the way that you handle the
collision of those two elements i found
really really interesting no for sure
and and
i mean it dude the book is usable like
if people put it to use in their life
their lives really will be better and
part of
what i like is the way that you're
walking people through
this is how you
identify your strengths right so asking
your friend your colleague you're i
forget the threat yeah family thank you
um and beginning to you're giving people
things to do in order to get to the
things that they're going to need in
order to move towards fulfillment now
i'm putting that word in your mouth i
actually don't you don't harp on
fulfillment a lot in the book so if you
had to say what the punch line is like
why are people working this hard what
are they working towards
exactly
i think the two things that we're all
working towards is a sense of peace
and a sense of purpose
peace is for yourself and purposes for
the world and i think we all exist in
both places
and i think where we go wrong
is that we try to live life in an either
or
and this was one of the most beautiful
lessons that i learned as a monk the
life was about self and about service
there was no either or it wasn't
disconnected or divided you couldn't
live a life of complete selfishness and
expect to be happy that wouldn't work
even if you look at like hedonism if you
look at it as a philosophy of life or
hedonism however it's pronounced here
but if you look at that as a philosophy
of life which is let's just accumulate
let's just hoard and let's just
celebrate on my own
we know people and stories about people
who will not be satisfied that way to
just have you're one of them you and
lisa and i can and i can say this
honestly and i said this to lizzie the
other day are two of the most generous
loving
people and humble people that i know
despite all your success and incredible
achievement and that's what endears
people to you it's not what you have
that endears people that may endear some
people to you but what keeps the right
people around is that you both have
these human qualities because you want
to serve you want to help you want to
support and collaborate and so for me i
feel like we either live and then we
leave the opposite the other opposite
life is our life is just about giving
it's just about service it's just about
helping that's not sustainable either
and so to me
i've discovered through real monk wisdom
that life is actually embracing
polarities
it's actually about doing a dance and
knowing which way to go at the right
time so i believe as much in strategy
as i do in sincerity
and i believe in much as generosity
as i do in generating value for myself
and i believe as much in giving as i do
in growing and i think as soon as you
start to say no it's either or you have
to choose i think that's where we start
to lose a part of ourselves and that's
why i add that compassion to passion
because i know a lot of people who do
what they
are passionate about
but actually lack meaning and purpose in
their life
because they
haven't turned it into a service tell me
some of the stories about the way that
monks tap into purpose and service it's
something service is something that
comes up in the book a lot
what is the power of service and how can
we without going to an ashram how can we
take our strengths and really give them
purpose and meaning
yeah so
one of the biggest things with service
in the ashram is service is a part of
your daily routine so there is no choice
about whether you serve or not
so that's a really great way to live
because you're almost exposed to lots of
different types of service so some of
that would be cooking for the homeless
or underprivileged children who don't
have access to warm meals some of it
would be building sustainable villages
inside which people can live and
villagers can find a home and an economy
so you're always connected to doing
something for others but here's if i was
gonna ask a monk why are we doing this
what would they say
they would say because i believe that
you have to see how you can be useful to
others so the dalai lama probably puts
the best that
really we're born to help others
and if we can't help them at least don't
hurt them
and to me that really sums it up
that we're born to help others we're
born with different gifts with different
geniuses with different talents to
improve the lives of others
and the question i always get from
someone in the audience who wants to ask
me an awkward question will be and
there's always one right and so the
person will say well jay how does
someone who has nothing in india or
africa do this like someone in in like a
really slum situation or a village
situation and they're always they'll
always pick on india and africa i'm not
saying those and i'll be like no but
this isn't for them i'm speaking to an
audience
that has
an education that has resources that has
network like i'm speaking to people who
can make a difference so anyone who is
in that area of society
has a responsibility so anything that
you're given in life you're seen as a
caretaker of
and the way you take the best care of it
is that you use it in the service of
others and that purifies you from
becoming attached to it and it feeling
like it actually eats you alive
and feeds your ego
as opposed to you now being purified and
cleansed of wealth success fame status
or time
or whatever you have an energy and
you're now using it for the highest
cause so that's what they would say they
would say it's the highest cause
of using what i've been given
in the service of others whatever you've
been given
there's a couple things in there let's
see if i can get to them both so one in
the book you do talk about
um somebody
mother or something she was a woman she
was married at 12 she ends up having
multiple children at she's abused yeah
so at one point she's pregnant he puts
her in a cow barn she gives birth in the
cow bar and sets the umbilical cord with
a rock
and then ends up going and living on the
street now this is somebody who has
nothing nothing nothing yeah but yet
ends up finding joy in being able and
she starts begging for other people yeah
because she can see just how hard other
people have it so when you were telling
that story that you know people are
trying to sort of pin you down of like
you know what can the the lowest of the
low really do
even there because there's something so
ingrained in the human condition that
neurologically you are going to be
rewarded for helping somebody in
whatever way even if all you can offer
them is a smile there really is like
just a neurological feedback loop which
is
super powerful yeah her name is sindhu
tai sakpal
and oh her story is just heart wrenching
like that story should be a movie maybe
we need to make that into a documentary
movie because that story of like
literally as you described it like she's
pregnant she's kicked out of her home
her husband abuses her while she's
pregnant she then gives birth on the
street like you said cuts with her
umbilical cord with a rock
and then goes on to build an orphanage
and
allows her husband who ends up being
broken on the streets into her orphanage
as one of the orphans not as her husband
i mean it's it's a mind-blowing story
and it's real and she's just this sweet
old lady and she's not done that as a
personal brand or to like you know she
doesn't that's not her video she's like
sushi is and and to me it's like that is
such a beautiful reminder to us all that
even feel even when you feel like you
have nothing to give
you still have something to give
and i think that's one of our challenges
that we're not exposed to enough stories
we're not experiencing enough of these
amazing stories of incredible human
feats and that's why the book is full of
other people's stories not just mine of
people that inspire me every time i go
through pain i think of sindhutai
right like that pushes me through
yeah that that to me is
it
was a perfect example of something you
say explicitly in the book which is the
answer is always service you're like
whatever you don't have to tell me the
problem the answer is service yeah like
if you're having a bad day service you
know if you're winning service it's like
whatever is going on service is the
thing that's going to make you
i don't know if you said feel better but
i that was how i interpreted it when i
think about
one of the things you talk a little bit
about joy explicitly but i would say an
undercurrent through the whole book for
me was hey everybody reading this you
have a monkey mind and that monkey mind
really makes [__] hard you can be
winning you can have everything and
you're comparing yourself to somebody
else and that's dragging you down or you
could be doing it for the wrong reasons
so it just feels sort of dark and icky
and it's like you're like i'm not even
passing judgment on that i'm just saying
i know the way the human mind works and
so i know where people are going to
struggle because i have struggled and
continue to struggle and it's
some of this is just a recognition of
the human condition
and coming at it from a place of i can
just predict that wherever you're at if
you lean into service then it's going to
change things but what i like is that
angle of leaning into service with
skills that are unique to you and that
became really powerful i'd love to hear
the moment where
you seek counsel because you're thinking
not sure that i'm
meant to stay in the ashram
and the advice you get and how you sort
of re-conceive of your own identity as
you
transition out yeah so it's it's weird
the way it sounds but becoming a monk
was my biggest dream growing up from
that time period that i made the monk 18
which we spoke about the last time i was
here and so that became like my identity
from 18 to 22 and then 22 to 25 when i
lived as a monk so it's like that's been
my identity for seven years at least in
my heart in my head
and so when you get to the end of a
self-awareness journey which is actually
the beginning but you get to the end of
it because you're like oh i'm not a monk
anymore and i'm sure you've gone through
similar things like oh i'm not a ceo
anymore of this
right of a business that does this or
someone else may go through i'm not
married anymore
i'm now divorced
i am now not single anymore or i'm not
alone i've got kids right it's like we
all go through these identity
transitions in our life
and to me
going from being a monk to not being a
monk was the hardest transition that i'd
been through at that time
and the question that i'm having is
i'm having reflections on who i truly am
and what my skills are what my strengths
are what my passion is what my
compassion is and i'm saying i want to
share all of this in like a cool way
through entertainment and i love movies
and that's what the book's full of like
pop culture references and it's it's a
it's it's who i am and what i love about
myself
and then i'm going but this doesn't
align with what monk life is meant to be
in a sacred way
and that is like looking in the mirror
and going oh like i'm not comfortable
with that so when i share that with my
teacher and we're having this discussion
he's his advice and i think this is the
part that you're referring to he says to
me that
there's
students that come to university
and then they become professors
and there are students that come to the
university and then they go out and
become entrepreneurs
or go out and work
and he says which do you think are
better
i'm like
i mean neither really like i can't
really choose what makes someone better
and he was just like
that's the point you you came here
some people stay at the monastery and go
on to become senior monks and teachers
and some people will go out and do what
they do outside and he goes but neither
is better and it was the simplest advice
it's one of those pieces of advice that
it's all about the person that says it
and not necessarily what you're hearing
but for me it just clarified the
judgment i had
the
attachment i had
that i could only be happy and
purposeful in this way
and that's really what we're all
struggling with that currently we all
have a projector screen up here that
goes this is what life's meant to look
like for it to be happy and then down
here we have the reality version of what
life actually looks like and we go oh no
they don't match that doesn't match
that's not working that means i'm going
in the wrong direction
the funny thing is the version you have
doesn't exist at all it's just an
imagination it's it's virtual reality
and the reality that you're experiencing
could actually be getting you closer to
that goal than you even think
but you just don't want to go down that
path because it doesn't look like the
one you imagine and that's where i was
at
i was having to go down a path that i
didn't imagine looked like success
but then the question is well what does
success look like then and it definitely
doesn't look like the version in your
head
so to me
i started to realize and i genuinely
believe this
and your affirmation is very useful to
me the three years of my life
living as a monk were like being at
monk's school
and the last seven years have been the
exam
and everything in this book is stuff
that i've tried and tested in the last
seven years i learned it among school
but i tested it in in reality
and i'm only sharing what in the last
seven years it's perfectly worked for me
to feel
like i'm exactly where i need to be
that doesn't mean i don't have off days
that doesn't mean that i'm happy all the
time it doesn't mean that i don't get
angry it doesn't mean that i don't get
upset but i'm going in the direction
that i want to be going
i had been asking myself what do i need
to do to get rich
and it left me really unhappy
so i changed the question
and i started asking
what would i do and love
every day
even if i were failing